CLASS XII (2024-25)
PHYSICS (THEORY)

Time: 3 hrs.	Max Marks: 70

No. of PeriodsMarksUnit-IElectrostatics

26

16Chapter-1: Electric Charges and FieldsChapter-2: Electrostatic Potential and CapacitanceUnit-IICurrent Electricity
18Chapter-3: Current ElectricityUnit-IIIMagnetic Effects of Current and Magnetism
25

17Chapter-4: Moving Charges and MagnetismChapter-5: Magnetism and MatterUnit-IVElectromagnetic Induction and Alternating Currents
24Chapter-6: Electromagnetic InductionChapter-7: Alternating CurrentUnit-VElectromagnetic Waves
04

18Chapter-8: Electromagnetic WavesUnit-VIOptics
30Chapter-9: Ray Optics and Optical InstrumentsChapter-10: Wave OpticsUnit-VIIDual Nature of Radiation and Matter
8

12Chapter-11: Dual Nature of Radiation and MatterUnit-VIIIAtoms and Nuclei
15Chapter-12: AtomsChapter-13: NucleiUnit-IXElectronic Devices
10

7Chapter-14: Semiconductor
Electronics: Materials, Devices and Simple CircuitsTotal16070
Unit I:	Electrostatics	26 Periods

Chapter-1: Electric Charges and Fields

Electric charges, Conservation of charge, Coulomb's law-force between two- point charges, forces between multiple charges; superposition principle and continuous charge distribution.
Electric field, electric field due to a point charge, electric field lines, electric dipole, electric field due to a dipole, torque on a dipole in uniform electric field.
Electric flux, statement of Gauss's theorem and its applications to find field due to infinitely long straight wire, uniformly charged infinite plane sheet and uniformly charged thin spherical shell (field inside and outside).

Chapter-2: Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance

Electric potential, potential difference, electric potential due to a point charge, a dipole and system of charges; equipotential surfaces, electrical potential energy of a system of two-point charges and of electric dipole in an electrostatic field.
Conductors and insulators, free charges and bound charges inside a conductor. Dielectrics and electric polarization, capacitors and capacitance, combination of capacitors in series and in parallel, capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor with and without dielectric medium between the plates, energy stored in a capacitor (no derivation, formulae only).

Unit II:	Current Electricity	18 Periods

Chapter-3: Current Electricity

Electric current, flow of electric charges in a metallic conductor, drift velocity, mobility and their relation with electric current; Ohm's law, V-I characteristics (linear and non-linear), electrical energy and power, electrical resistivity and conductivity, temperature dependence of resistance, Internal resistance of a cell, potential difference and emf of a cell, combination of cells in series and in parallel, Kirchhoff's rules, Wheatstone bridge.

Unit III:	Magnetic Effects of Current and Magnetism	25 Periods

Chapter-4: Moving Charges and Magnetism

Concept of magnetic field, Oersted's experiment.

Biot - Savart law and its application to current carrying circular loop.

Ampere's law and its applications to infinitely long straight wire. Straight solenoid (only qualitative treatment), force on a moving charge in uniform magnetic and electric fields.
Force on a current-carrying conductor in a uniform magnetic field, force between two parallel current-carrying conductors-definition of ampere, torque experienced by a current loop in uniform magnetic field; Current loop as a magnetic dipole and its magnetic dipole moment, moving coil galvanometer- its current sensitivity and conversion to ammeter and voltmeter.

Chapter-5: Magnetism and Matter

Bar magnet, bar magnet as an equivalent solenoid (qualitative treatment only), magnetic field intensity due to a magnetic dipole (bar magnet) along its axis and perpendicular to its axis (qualitative treatment only), torque on a magnetic dipole (bar magnet) in a uniform magnetic field (qualitative treatment only), magnetic field lines.
Magnetic properties of materials- Para-, dia- and ferro - magnetic substances with examples, Magnetization of materials, effect of temperature on magnetic properties.


Unit IV:	Electromagnetic Induction and Alternating Currents	24 Periods Chapter-6: Electromagnetic Induction
Electromagnetic induction; Faraday's laws, induced EMF and current; Lenz's Law, Self and mutual induction.

Chapter-7: Alternating Current

Alternating currents, peak and RMS value of alternating current/voltage; reactance and impedance; LCR series circuit (phasors only), resonance, power in AC circuits, power factor, wattless current.
AC generator, Transformer.

Unit V:	Electromagnetic waves	04 Periods Chapter-8: Electromagnetic Waves
Basic	idea	of	displacement	current,	Electromagnetic	waves,	their characteristics, their transverse nature (qualitative idea only).
Electromagnetic spectrum (radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, X-rays, gamma rays) including elementary facts about their uses.
Unit VI:	Optics	30 Periods

Chapter-9: Ray Optics and Optical Instruments

Ray Optics: Reflection of light, spherical mirrors, mirror formula, refraction of light, total internal reflection and optical fibers, refraction at spherical surfaces, lenses, thin lens formula, lens maker's formula, magnification, power of a lens, combination of thin lenses in contact, refraction of light through a prism.
Optical instruments: Microscopes and astronomical telescopes (reflecting and refracting) and their magnifying powers.

Chapter-10: Wave Optics

Wave optics: Wave front and Huygen's principle, reflection and refraction of plane wave at a plane surface using wave fronts. Proof of laws of reflection and refraction using Huygen's principle. Interference, Young's double slit experiment and expression for fringe width (No derivation final expression only), coherent sources and sustained interference of light, diffraction due to a single slit, width of central maxima (qualitative treatment only).

Unit VII:	Dual Nature of Radiation and Matter	08 Periods

Chapter-11: Dual Nature of Radiation and Matter

Dual	nature	of	radiation,	Photoelectric	effect,	Hertz	and	Lenard's observations; Einstein's photoelectric equation-particle nature of light.
Experimental study of photoelectric effect

Matter waves-wave nature of particles, de-Broglie relation.
Unit VIII:	Atoms and Nuclei	15 Periods

Chapter-12: Atoms

Alpha-particle scattering experiment; Rutherford's model of atom; Bohr model of hydrogen atom, Expression for radius of nth possible orbit, velocity and energy of electron in nth orbit, hydrogen line spectra (qualitative treatment only).

Chapter-13: Nuclei

Composition and size of nucleus, nuclear force

Mass-energy relation, mass defect; binding energy per nucleon and its variation with mass number; nuclear fission, nuclear fusion.


Unit IX:	Electronic Devices	10 Periods

Chapter-14: Semiconductor Electronics: Materials, Devices and Simple Circuits
Energy bands in conductors, semiconductors and insulators (qualitative ideas only) Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors- p and n type, p-n junction
Semiconductor diode - I-V characteristics in forward and reverse bias, application of junction diode -diode as a rectifier.
